\chapter{Basics}

In case you're completely new to poker, and to put my mind at ease
that this book covers Texas Holdem Tournaments as completely as
possible, this chapter covers some absolute basics of the game.

\section{The Deck of Cards}

Poker is played with a standard 52 card deck of cards. There are no
jokers used. A 53rd full-coloured card, the cut card, is used to cut
the cards onto and is the base card of the deck, to stop anyone
seeing the bottom card of the deck and also to prevent cheats from
dealing the bottom cards of the deck.

Each card has a rank and a suit. There are thirteen ranks. From
highest to lowest they are Ace, King, Queen, Jack, Ten, Nine, Eight,
Seven, Six, Five, Four, Three, Two. The lowest two ranks are also
called Trey and Deuce. Ace can be used as a One to make
the lowest straight 5432A, and also as the highest card of the highest
straight AKQJT. Besides its role in the 5432A straight the Ace is
always high.

There are four suits: Clubs, Diamonds, Hearts and Spades. The suits
are used to make flushes (five cards of the same suit) and for no
other reason. There is no ordering between the suits and because
Holdem uses five shared cards and two unique hole cards, a flush is
only possible in one suit. You can't get a heart flush versus a
Diamond flush in the same hand.

Every card is different. There are thirteen clubs (Ace of clubs, King
of clubs, Queen of Clubs down to the Two of Clubs), thirteen hearts
(Ace of hearts, King of hearts down to the Two of Hearts) and
thirteen Spades and Thirteen Diamonds, making Fifty-Two cards total.

\section{Looking at your cards}

Put your two hole cards together and peel up the corners and read the
rank and suit of each card. Cover lines of sight with your other hand,
the same way you cover your pin number with your other hand when you
use an Automatic Teller Machine.

Not everyone at the table will be looking at their cards properly. If
you can see someone else's hole cards, it's polite to give them a
warning but it's not required. This is the same protocol in cricket
when the non-striker batsman is backing up too far and the bowler is
considering running him out instead of bowling the ball; the
``Mankad'' dismissal.

\section{Poker rankings}

Poker hands are on a ladder with nine rungs. The hand on
the highest rung wins, if two hands are on the same rung the hand with
the higher determining cards wins. The same-rung determination
sometimes goes against poker rarity: it's rarer to make a six-high
flush than a King-high flush, but the King-high flush wins.

% FIXME put the ranking table in

A quick word on ``any'' for the Board Requirements in the table. In
Holdem you can ``play the board'', use the five community cards as
your final poker hand. For a straight to be the best hand, not only
must the board have at least three close cards, but the board can't
itself be a flush or a full house or quads. For High Card to be the
winning hand, the board must have no straights, flushes or even a pair
on it.

\section{Kickers}

Kickers are used as tie-breakers for the low-rung poker hands of
trips, two pair, one pair and high card. Full houses, flushes and
straights use all five cards and don't have kickers. A two pair hand
has one kicker (the highest card not involved in the two pair), trips
has two kickers (the two cards not in the trips), one pair has three
kickers (the ones that don't make the pair) and high card is
effectively five kickers. You count down the kickers until one is
higher. If the kickers are the same, both hands win and it's a split
pot.




